Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: smooth muscle physiology.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is smooth muscle, where is it found,
and how does it differ broadly from skeletal and cardiac muscle?
Smooth muscle is the involuntary, non-striated muscle that forms the walls of
hollow organs and tubes throughout the body — the blood vessels, the airways,
the gastrointestinal tract, the bladder and ureters, the uterus,
the iris and the ducts of glands.
It is termed smooth because, unlike skeletal and cardiac muscle,
it lacks the regular sarcomeric arrangement of contractile proteins that gives
those tissues their striations. It differs broadly in several ways.
It is under involuntary, autonomic,
hormonal and local control rather than somatic voluntary control.
It contracts slowly and can sustain tension for long periods with very little
energy expenditure.
It shows plasticity, maintaining tension over a wide range of lengths,
which suits an organ that must hold tone whether full or empty.
Many smooth muscles are spontaneously active, with their own pacemaker activity,
and many are electrically coupled so that a sheet contracts as a unit.
Its contraction is triggered by a rise in intracellular calcium, as in all muscle,
but the molecular switch is on the myosin rather than on the actin filament,
through a quite different mechanism.
So smooth muscle is the slow, economical,
involuntary muscle of the hollow organs and vessels,
built and controlled quite differently from striated muscle,
and it is central to vascular tone, airway calibre,
gut motility and much of what we manipulate pharmacologically.
Describe the structure of smooth muscle at the cellular level.
Smooth muscle cells are small, spindle-shaped, mononucleate cells,
far smaller than skeletal fibres, arranged in sheets or bundles.
Within them the contractile apparatus is present but organised quite differently.
There are no sarcomeres and no regular registration of filaments,
so there are no striations.
Instead, actin thin filaments are anchored to structures called dense bodies in the
cytoplasm and to dense bands on the inner surface of the membrane — the functional
equivalents of the Z-discs of striated muscle — and myosin thick filaments lie
among them in a looser, obliquely oriented lattice.
This diagonal arrangement of the contractile filaments,
anchored to dense bodies and to the membrane,
means that when the filaments slide the whole cell shortens and twists,
and the force is transmitted cell to cell through these attachments.
There is a cytoskeletal network of intermediate filaments linking the dense bodies.
The sarcoplasmic reticulum is present but less extensive than in skeletal muscle,
and there is no organised T-tubule system,
though small invaginations called caveolae may serve an analogous role in bringing
the surface membrane close to the calcium stores.
So the smooth muscle cell contains the same actin and myosin,
but arranged as an oblique, dense-body-anchored lattice rather than ordered
sarcomeres, which underlies both its lack of striation and its ability to generate
force over a wide range of lengths.
What is the molecular mechanism of contraction in smooth muscle?
Contraction in smooth muscle, as in all muscle,
is triggered by a rise in intracellular calcium,
but the molecular switch differs fundamentally from striated muscle.
In skeletal and cardiac muscle, calcium binds troponin on the thin filament to
expose myosin-binding sites; smooth muscle has no troponin.
Instead the regulation is on the thick filament, through phosphorylation of myosin.
The sequence is as follows.
Intracellular calcium rises and binds the calcium-binding protein calmodulin.
The calcium–calmodulin complex then activates the enzyme myosin light chain kinase.
This kinase phosphorylates the regulatory light chain on the head of the myosin
molecule.
Only when the myosin light chain is phosphorylated can the myosin head bind actin,
undergo its cross-bridge cycle and generate force.
Relaxation occurs when intracellular calcium falls and a second enzyme,
myosin light chain phosphatase, removes the phosphate, switching the myosin off.
The contraction is therefore graded with the level of calcium and with the balance
between the kinase and the phosphatase.
Because this enzymatic cascade is slower than the direct calcium–troponin switch of
striated muscle, smooth muscle contracts and relaxes slowly.
So the central mechanism is calcium–calmodulin activation of myosin light chain
kinase, which phosphorylates myosin to permit cross-bridge cycling,
and dephosphorylation by the phosphatase brings relaxation — a thick-filament,
enzyme-based control quite unlike the thin-filament switch of striated muscle.
Where does the activating calcium come from?
The calcium that activates smooth muscle contraction comes from two sources —
outside the cell and from the internal store — and the balance between them varies
with the tissue and the stimulus.
Extracellular calcium enters through channels in the surface membrane:
voltage-gated calcium channels, principally the L-type,
open when the membrane depolarises,
and there are also receptor-operated and store-operated channels that open in
response to agonists or to depletion of the internal store.
This entry of external calcium is important in smooth muscle,
far more so than in skeletal muscle,
which is why this tissue is sensitive to calcium-channel-blocking drugs.
The internal store is the sarcoplasmic reticulum,
which releases calcium into the cytoplasm chiefly through inositol-trisphosphate
receptors: when an agonist binds a G-protein-coupled receptor,
it generates the second messenger inositol trisphosphate,
which opens these channels and releases stored calcium.
There are also ryanodine receptors contributing calcium-induced calcium release.
The released and entering calcium together raise the cytoplasmic concentration to
activate the contractile cascade, and calcium is then removed by pumps on the
membrane and the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and by sodium–calcium exchange,
to bring relaxation.
So activating calcium enters from outside through voltage-,
receptor- and store-operated channels and is released from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum mainly via inositol-trisphosphate receptors,
and the dual sourcing explains both the variety of stimuli that contract smooth
muscle and its sensitivity to calcium-channel blockers.
Distinguish electromechanical from pharmacomechanical coupling.
Smooth muscle can be made to contract by two broad routes,
and the distinction is useful because it explains how the tissue responds both to
electrical and to chemical signals.
Electromechanical coupling is contraction triggered by a change in membrane
potential: depolarisation of the membrane — whether from pacemaker activity,
from stretch, or from excitatory neurotransmitters that open ion channels — opens
voltage-gated calcium channels, calcium enters, and contraction follows,
much as depolarisation triggers contraction in striated muscle.
This is the dominant mode in spontaneously active visceral smooth muscle such as
the gut.
Pharmacomechanical coupling, by contrast,
is contraction produced by an agonist acting on its receptor without any necessary
change in membrane potential: the agonist, through a G-protein-coupled receptor,
generates inositol trisphosphate that releases calcium from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum, and may also sensitise the contractile apparatus to calcium,
so that tension develops even when the membrane voltage is unchanged or the cell is
voltage-clamped.
Many hormonal and paracrine influences act this way.
In practice the two coexist and interact,
an agonist often both depolarising the membrane and releasing stored calcium.
The clinical relevance is that smooth muscle tone can be altered either by changing
membrane potential, as potassium-channel openers do,
or by acting on receptors and second messengers, as many vasoactive drugs do.
So electromechanical coupling links voltage to calcium entry,
pharmacomechanical coupling links receptor activation to calcium release and
sensitisation, and together they give smooth muscle its rich repertoire of control.
Contrast single-unit and multi-unit smooth muscle.
Smooth muscle is classified functionally into single-unit and multi-unit types
according to how its cells are coupled and controlled,
though many tissues lie on a spectrum between them.
Single-unit, or visceral, smooth muscle is the commoner type and is found in the
walls of the gut, the bladder, the ureters, the uterus and many small blood vessels.
Its cells are extensively connected by gap junctions,
so that electrical activity spreads from cell to cell and the whole sheet behaves
as a functional syncytium, contracting as a single unit;
it is typically spontaneously active,
with pacemaker regions generating slow waves and action potentials that propagate
through the tissue, and it is responsive to stretch.
Multi-unit smooth muscle, by contrast,
consists of cells that are relatively independent, with few gap junctions,
each more or less individually innervated,
so that contraction is finely graded by the degree of neural activation rather than
spreading as a wave.
It is found where precise, graded control is needed:
the iris and ciliary muscle of the eye, the piloerector muscles, the vas deferens,
and the smooth muscle of the larger airways and some large arteries.
The single-unit type suits organs that must empty as a coordinated whole;
the multi-unit type suits structures requiring delicate, localised adjustment.
So single-unit smooth muscle is gap-junction-coupled, syncytial,
spontaneously active and stretch-sensitive,
while multi-unit smooth muscle is individually innervated and finely graded,
the two designs matching the functional needs of their organs.
Explain the latch state and why it matters.
The latch state is a distinctive property of smooth muscle that allows it to
maintain force for prolonged periods at very low energy cost,
and it is one of the features that most sets it apart from striated muscle.
When smooth muscle is first stimulated and calcium rises,
myosin light chain kinase phosphorylates myosin, cross-bridges cycle rapidly,
and tension develops.
If the stimulus is sustained but calcium then falls back somewhat,
the muscle does not simply relax; instead it enters the latch state,
in which tension is maintained by cross-bridges that cycle very slowly,
or are effectively locked, in a dephosphorylated, attached configuration.
These slowly-cycling or latched bridges hold force with minimal ATP turnover.
The mechanism is thought to involve dephosphorylation of attached cross-bridges
that detach only very slowly, so that high force is sustained at low
phosphorylation and low energy use.
Its importance is physiological and clinical.
Physiologically it allows tissues that must hold tone continuously — the walls of
blood vessels maintaining vascular tone, sphincters holding closed,
the bladder neck — to do so for hours without fatiguing or consuming much energy,
a feat skeletal muscle could never match.
This economy is why a blood vessel can sustain tone all day.
So the latch state is the smooth-muscle mechanism of cheap,
sustained tension through slowly-cycling cross-bridges, and it underlies the tonic,
fatigue-resistant maintenance of vascular tone,
sphincter closure and organ wall tension.
How is the level of contraction regulated beyond simply calcium — for instance
calcium sensitisation?
The force a smooth muscle generates for a given level of calcium is not fixed;
it can be modulated by altering the balance between the kinase that switches myosin
on and the phosphatase that switches it off,
a phenomenon called calcium sensitisation or desensitisation.
Contraction depends on the proportion of myosin that is phosphorylated,
which is set by the relative activities of myosin light chain kinase and myosin
light chain phosphatase.
If the phosphatase is inhibited, more myosin stays phosphorylated for the same
calcium, so the muscle generates more force at a given calcium level — it is
sensitised to calcium.
The principal pathway for this is the small G-protein RhoA and its effector
Rho-associated kinase, Rho-kinase, which is activated by many contractile agonists
through G-protein-coupled receptors;
Rho-kinase phosphorylates and inhibits the myosin phosphatase,
sensitising the muscle.
Conversely, the muscle can be desensitised:
nitric oxide and other relaxant signals,
acting through cyclic GMP and cyclic AMP and their kinases,
promote relaxation partly by enhancing phosphatase activity and reducing calcium.
This is clinically important because Rho-kinase is a drug target in conditions such
as pulmonary hypertension and vasospasm,
and because it explains how agonists can produce strong,
sustained contraction without large rises in calcium.
So contraction is regulated not only by calcium concentration but by the
kinase–phosphatase balance, with the RhoA/Rho-kinase pathway sensitising the
apparatus to calcium and relaxant second messengers desensitising it — a layer of
control with real therapeutic relevance.
How is smooth muscle innervated and neurally controlled?
Smooth muscle is innervated by the autonomic nervous system,
and its neural control differs strikingly from the precise one-to-one arrangement
of the skeletal neuromuscular junction. There is no discrete,
structured motor end-plate.
Instead, autonomic postganglionic fibres — sympathetic and parasympathetic — run
through the tissue bearing a series of swellings along their length called
varicosities, each a site of neurotransmitter storage and release.
The transmitter is released from these varicosities and diffuses across a
relatively wide and variable cleft to act on receptors distributed over the muscle
cell surface, so that a single fibre influences many cells and a single cell may be
influenced by several fibres — a diffuse,
en-passant arrangement rather than a focal junction.
In single-unit muscle, where cells are electrically coupled,
only some cells need be directly innervated because excitation spreads through gap
junctions; in multi-unit muscle the innervation is denser and more individual.
The transmitters are the classical autonomic agents — noradrenaline and
acetylcholine — but also a wide range of co-transmitters and modulators such as
ATP, nitric oxide, vasoactive intestinal peptide and others,
acting through many receptor subtypes,
which is why smooth muscle responses are so diverse and so manipulable
pharmacologically.
So smooth muscle is controlled by autonomic fibres releasing transmitter from
varicosities over a diffuse area onto distributed receptors,
a flexible arrangement quite unlike the skeletal end-plate,
and the variety of transmitters and receptors gives the rich pharmacology we
exploit clinically.
What roles do hormones, local mediators and the endothelium play?
Beyond direct innervation, smooth muscle tone is powerfully shaped by circulating
hormones, by locally released mediators,
and — in blood vessels especially — by the overlying endothelium,
so that the autonomic nerves are only part of the story.
Circulating hormones such as adrenaline, angiotensin, vasopressin and,
in the uterus, oxytocin act on smooth muscle receptors to contract or relax it.
Locally produced mediators provide fine, regional control: in the vasculature,
metabolic products such as adenosine, carbon dioxide,
potassium and a low pH cause local vasodilatation to match flow to tissue demand,
while substances such as endothelin and thromboxane contract.
The vascular endothelium is itself a crucial regulator,
releasing relaxing factors — above all nitric oxide,
generated from arginine and acting through cyclic GMP to relax the underlying
muscle, together with prostacyclin and endothelium-derived hyperpolarising factor —
and contracting factors such as endothelin-1.
The continuous basal release of nitric oxide sets much of resting vascular tone,
and its loss in endothelial dysfunction contributes to hypertension and vasospasm.
Inflammatory mediators such as histamine and bradykinin also act on smooth muscle,
contracting airway and contracting or dilating vascular muscle.
So smooth muscle integrates hormonal, metabolic,
inflammatory and endothelial signals on top of autonomic input,
with endothelial nitric oxide a dominant regulator of vascular tone,
and this integration is the physiological basis for much cardiovascular and
respiratory pharmacology.
Discuss vascular smooth muscle and the control of vascular tone,
including the myogenic response.
Vascular smooth muscle, in the walls of arteries, arterioles and veins,
sets the calibre of the vessels and so governs both systemic vascular resistance
and the distribution of blood flow,
making it one of the most important smooth muscles for the anaesthetist.
It maintains a continuous partial contraction, vascular tone,
against which dilator and constrictor influences act.
That tone is the integrated product of several inputs:
tonic sympathetic vasoconstrictor drive through noradrenaline on alpha receptors;
circulating hormones; local metabolic and endothelial factors,
with basal nitric oxide opposing constriction;
and an intrinsic property called the myogenic response.
The myogenic response is the tendency of vascular smooth muscle to contract when
stretched by a rise in transmural pressure and to relax when pressure falls:
increased pressure stretches the muscle, which depolarises and admits calcium,
causing constriction that opposes the distending pressure.
This intrinsic behaviour is central to autoregulation,
the maintenance of relatively constant blood flow to organs such as the brain and
kidney across a range of perfusion pressures.
The arterioles, the resistance vessels,
are where tone has its greatest effect on resistance,
while venous smooth muscle governs capacitance and venous return.
So vascular smooth muscle integrates neural, hormonal,
metabolic and endothelial signals with an intrinsic myogenic,
pressure-sensing response to set vascular tone,
resistance and the distribution of flow,
and it is the effector on which most cardiovascular drugs ultimately act.
How is vascular smooth muscle made to relax, and how do drugs exploit this?
Vascular smooth muscle is relaxed by lowering intracellular calcium,
by desensitising the contractile apparatus, or by hyperpolarising the membrane,
and several signalling pathways and many drugs converge on these mechanisms.
The two great second-messenger pathways are cyclic GMP and cyclic AMP.
The nitric-oxide pathway is central: nitric oxide,
whether released by the endothelium or donated by drugs,
activates soluble guanylate cyclase to raise cyclic GMP,
which through protein kinase G lowers calcium and enhances myosin phosphatase
activity, relaxing the muscle.
This is exploited by the organic nitrates such as glyceryl trinitrate,
which donate nitric oxide, and by phosphodiesterase-five inhibitors such as
sildenafil, which prevent the breakdown of cyclic GMP,
used in pulmonary hypertension.
The cyclic-AMP pathway, activated by beta-2 adrenoceptor agonists and by
prostacyclin, similarly relaxes the muscle through protein kinase A.
Calcium-channel blockers such as nifedipine relax vascular muscle by blocking the
L-type calcium channels and so reducing calcium entry.
Potassium-channel openers hyperpolarise the membrane,
closing voltage-gated calcium channels. Alpha-blockers remove sympathetic
constrictor tone, and Rho-kinase inhibitors reduce calcium sensitisation.
So vascular relaxation is achieved by raising cyclic GMP or cyclic AMP,
blocking calcium entry, opening potassium channels or removing constrictor drive,
and the major classes of vasodilator and antihypertensive drugs each act at one of
these well-defined points.
Describe airway smooth muscle and its relevance to anaesthesia.
Airway smooth muscle encircles the bronchi and bronchioles and,
by contracting or relaxing, alters airway calibre and resistance,
which makes it directly relevant to ventilation and to the bronchospasm we must
prevent and treat.
Its tone is set largely by the autonomic nervous system and local mediators.
Parasympathetic vagal fibres release acetylcholine onto muscarinic M-three
receptors to cause bronchoconstriction and increased secretion,
and this cholinergic tone is the main reversible component of airway narrowing —
the basis for antimuscarinic bronchodilators.
There is no significant direct sympathetic innervation of human airway muscle,
but it is richly supplied with beta-2 adrenoceptors that respond to circulating
adrenaline and to beta-2 agonist drugs by relaxing,
through the cyclic-AMP pathway — the mechanism of salbutamol.
A non-adrenergic, non-cholinergic inhibitory system,
using nitric oxide and vasoactive intestinal peptide, also relaxes the airway.
In asthma and in airway irritation, inflammatory mediators such as histamine,
leukotrienes and prostaglandins contract the muscle and the airway becomes
hyperreactive.
For the anaesthetist this is crucial: airway instrumentation, light anaesthesia,
irritant volatile agents and certain drugs can provoke bronchospasm,
particularly in the asthmatic, and treatment exploits the relaxant pathways —
beta-2 agonists, antimuscarinics, magnesium,
and the bronchodilating volatile agents.
So airway smooth muscle is constricted by vagal cholinergic tone and inflammatory
mediators and relaxed through beta-2 adrenoceptors and the nitric-oxide system,
and managing its tone to prevent and treat bronchospasm is a routine anaesthetic
concern.
Tell me about gastrointestinal smooth muscle and the generation of motility.
Gastrointestinal smooth muscle generates the motility that mixes and propels the
gut contents, and it does so through an intrinsic electrical rhythm modulated by
nerves and hormones.
The muscle is single-unit, syncytial smooth muscle,
arranged in circular and longitudinal layers,
and it is not quiescent at rest but shows a continuous underlying electrical rhythm
called slow waves — slow, rhythmic oscillations in membrane potential that set the
basic frequency of contraction and that differ in rate along the gut.
These slow waves are generated not by the muscle cells themselves but by
specialised pacemaker cells, the interstitial cells of Cajal,
which lie between the muscle layers and are electrically coupled to them;
they are the pacemakers of the gut.
A slow wave does not by itself cause much contraction,
but when it is depolarised further — by stretch, by parasympathetic acetylcholine,
or by excitatory hormones — its peak reaches threshold and triggers action
potentials and calcium entry, producing contraction whose strength depends on how
many spikes occur.
The whole is coordinated by the enteric nervous system,
the gut's intrinsic neural network, modulated by the autonomic supply,
to produce organised patterns such as peristalsis and segmentation.
So gastrointestinal motility arises from slow waves generated by the interstitial
cells of Cajal, converted into contraction when depolarisation reaches threshold,
and orchestrated by the enteric nervous system into the propulsive and mixing
movements of digestion — a system whose suppression underlies the postoperative
ileus we frequently encounter.
Describe uterine smooth muscle and its behaviour in pregnancy and labour.
Uterine smooth muscle, the myometrium,
is a single-unit smooth muscle whose behaviour changes dramatically through
pregnancy and labour, and it is of obvious importance in obstetric anaesthesia.
Outside pregnancy it shows cyclical activity under hormonal control.
During pregnancy it undergoes enormous hypertrophy and hyperplasia to accommodate
the growing fetus, while being kept relatively quiescent — progesterone,
nitric oxide and other influences maintaining relaxation so the pregnancy is not
expelled prematurely.
Towards term the muscle becomes progressively more excitable and more coupled:
the expression of gap junctions increases,
electrically linking the cells into a coordinated syncytium,
and the number of oxytocin and prostaglandin receptors rises,
so that the myometrium becomes able to generate the strong, coordinated,
propagated contractions of labour.
Oxytocin, acting on its receptors to raise intracellular calcium,
and prostaglandins are the key uterotonic stimuli,
and after delivery sustained contraction is essential to compress the uterine
vessels and prevent haemorrhage — the basis of giving oxytocin at delivery.
Conversely, tocolytic drugs that relax the myometrium — beta-2 agonists,
calcium-channel blockers, magnesium and oxytocin antagonists — are used to suppress
premature labour, and the volatile anaesthetic agents relax the uterus,
which can be useful for uterine relaxation but contributes to atony and bleeding.
So the myometrium transforms from a quiescent,
progesterone-maintained state to a coupled,
oxytocin-responsive contractile syncytium at term,
and manipulating its tone with uterotonics and tocolytics is central to managing
labour and postpartum haemorrhage.
What about the smooth muscle of the bladder and ureters?
The smooth muscle of the lower urinary tract — the detrusor of the bladder wall,
the urethral sphincter mechanism and the ureters — governs the storage and voiding
of urine, and its control illustrates the interplay of autonomic divisions on
smooth muscle.
The detrusor is single-unit smooth muscle that must relax to allow the bladder to
fill at low pressure, exhibiting the plasticity and stress-relaxation typical of
smooth muscle so that pressure rises little as volume increases,
and then contract in a coordinated, sustained way to empty it.
Filling and storage are promoted by sympathetic activity,
which relaxes the detrusor through beta-3 adrenoceptors and contracts the internal
sphincter through alpha receptors; voiding is driven by parasympathetic activity,
which contracts the detrusor through muscarinic M-three receptors while the
sphincter relaxes.
This arrangement is the target of drugs:
antimuscarinics and beta-3 agonists are used to relax an overactive detrusor,
and alpha-blockers relax the bladder neck and prostatic smooth muscle in outflow
obstruction.
The ureters are single-unit muscle with intrinsic pacemaker activity that generates
peristaltic waves to propel urine to the bladder,
and ureteric colic from a stone reflects this muscle contracting against an
obstruction.
Perioperatively, anaesthesia and anticholinergic and opioid drugs can impair
detrusor function and contribute to postoperative urinary retention.
So bladder and ureteric smooth muscle store and expel urine under reciprocal
autonomic control, with sympathetic storage and parasympathetic voiding,
and its pharmacology and its perioperative dysfunction are of regular clinical
relevance.
How does the response of smooth muscle to drugs differ from that of skeletal muscle?
The pharmacology of smooth muscle is quite distinct from that of skeletal muscle,
reflecting their different structures and control,
and recognising this prevents conceptual errors.
Skeletal muscle is controlled at a single point,
the nicotinic neuromuscular junction,
so it is paralysed by the neuromuscular blocking drugs — depolarising and
non-depolarising agents acting on the nicotinic receptor — and these have
essentially no effect on smooth muscle, which has no such junction.
Conversely, smooth muscle responds to a wide array of drugs that do not affect
skeletal muscle: it is contracted or relaxed by autonomic agents acting on
adrenoceptors and muscarinic receptors,
by drugs acting on the many other receptor types it expresses,
by calcium-channel blockers, which strongly relax smooth muscle because of its
dependence on extracellular calcium entry but barely affect skeletal muscle,
which uses its own internal calcium,
and by agents acting on the second-messenger pathways such as nitrates and
phosphodiesterase inhibitors.
Smooth muscle is also far more sensitive to local and humoral mediators.
The contractile cascade itself differs,
being kinase-based on myosin rather than troponin-based on actin,
so the molecular targets differ.
The practical upshot is that we relax or contract smooth muscle with autonomic and
vasoactive drugs and calcium-channel blockers,
while we paralyse skeletal muscle with neuromuscular blockers,
and the two repertoires scarcely overlap.
So smooth and skeletal muscle answer to entirely different pharmacologies — a
consequence of their different junctions,
calcium sources and contractile control — which is fundamental to rational drug use.
What is meant by the plasticity of smooth muscle, including stress-relaxation?
Plasticity refers to the ability of smooth muscle to adjust its length and tension
over a wide range and to adapt to sustained changes in load,
a property that suits the muscle of reservoir organs and is quite unlike the
behaviour of striated muscle.
One aspect is the breadth of the length–tension relationship:
smooth muscle can generate useful force across a far wider range of lengths than
skeletal muscle, because its loosely arranged,
dense-body-anchored filaments are not constrained to a single optimal overlap.
This lets the wall of a hollow organ contract effectively whether the organ is
nearly empty or greatly distended.
A related phenomenon is stress-relaxation, and its converse:
when a smooth muscle is suddenly stretched,
tension first rises but then gradually falls back towards its original level over
seconds to minutes as the muscle accommodates to the new length; conversely,
when shortened, tension first falls and then partly recovers.
This is why a hollow organ such as the bladder or stomach can fill progressively
with only a small rise in internal pressure,
accommodating large volume changes — a vital function for storage.
Over the longer term, smooth muscle also shows true structural plasticity,
undergoing hypertrophy and hyperplasia in response to sustained load,
as in the bladder above an obstruction, the heart's vessels in hypertension,
or the pregnant uterus.
So plasticity gives smooth muscle a wide working range and,
through stress-relaxation, the ability to accommodate volume at low pressure,
with longer-term remodelling to chronic load — properties essential to the
reservoir and conduit organs it serves.
Which drugs acting on smooth muscle are of particular anaesthetic importance?
A great many of the drugs we use perioperatively act on smooth muscle,
and grouping them by mechanism is the clearest way to hold them.
For the vasculature, the vasodilators:
organic nitrates such as glyceryl trinitrate donating nitric oxide;
calcium-channel blockers such as nifedipine and the perioperative agent
clevidipine; alpha-blockers; the directly acting agents and inodilators; and,
in pulmonary hypertension, phosphodiesterase-five inhibitors and inhaled nitric
oxide.
The vasoconstrictors we use to support pressure — phenylephrine, noradrenaline,
metaraminol, vasopressin — act on vascular smooth muscle through alpha and
vasopressin receptors.
For the airway, the bronchodilators: beta-2 agonists such as salbutamol,
antimuscarinics such as ipratropium, magnesium,
and the bronchodilating volatile agents. For the uterus,
the uterotonics — oxytocin, ergometrine, prostaglandins — and the tocolytics.
For the gut and bladder, antimuscarinics and prokinetics influence motility,
and antispasmodics relax visceral muscle.
Magnesium deserves special mention as a smooth-muscle relaxant acting partly as a
physiological calcium antagonist, useful in bronchospasm,
in pre-eclampsia and in attenuating vasospasm.
The key conceptual point is that all of these act on the same final effector —
smooth muscle calcium handling and the kinase–phosphatase balance — by different
routes.
So the anaesthetist's vasopressors, vasodilators, bronchodilators,
uterotonics and tocolytics are all smooth-muscle drugs,
and understanding the common contractile mechanism unifies their otherwise
disparate actions.
Finally, draw together the anaesthetic relevance of smooth muscle physiology.
Drawing the station together, smooth muscle is the involuntary effector that sets
vascular tone, airway calibre, gut and uterine and bladder activity,
and its physiology underlies a large part of what we monitor and manipulate every
day.
Its defining features explain its behaviour: a kinase-based,
calcium–calmodulin–myosin-light-chain mechanism that is slow and gradable;
a dependence on extracellular calcium entry that makes it sensitive to
calcium-channel blockers; the latch state that lets it hold tone economically;
pharmacomechanical coupling and calcium sensitisation that let receptors and the
Rho-kinase pathway tune force; diffuse autonomic innervation and rich
responsiveness to hormones, metabolites and the endothelium;
and plasticity that lets reservoir organs accommodate volume at low pressure.
From these flow the clinical themes:
vascular smooth muscle as the target of every vasopressor and vasodilator and the
seat of autoregulation; airway smooth muscle as the site of bronchospasm and its
treatment; uterine smooth muscle as the focus of uterotonics,
tocolytics and postpartum haemorrhage;
gut smooth muscle whose suppression gives ileus;
and bladder muscle whose dysfunction gives retention.
Nitric oxide and calcium handling recur throughout as the levers we pull.
So smooth muscle physiology is not an academic aside but the common foundation of
cardiovascular, respiratory, obstetric and gastrointestinal pharmacology,
and understanding its single contractile logic makes sense of the whole repertoire
of drugs that act upon it.
How does smooth muscle relax — what removes the activating calcium?
Relaxation of smooth muscle requires intracellular calcium to be returned to its
low resting level and the myosin to be dephosphorylated,
and several mechanisms remove calcium from the cytoplasm.
On the surface membrane, a calcium ATPase pump actively extrudes calcium out of the
cell, and the sodium–calcium exchanger uses the inward sodium gradient to expel
calcium; on the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a separate calcium ATPase, the SERCA pump,
re-sequesters calcium into the store.
As calcium falls, it dissociates from calmodulin,
myosin light chain kinase becomes inactive,
and the ever-present myosin light chain phosphatase dephosphorylates the myosin,
switching off cross-bridge cycling so the muscle relaxes — except where the latch
state maintains residual tension.
Relaxation is actively promoted by the second-messenger pathways: cyclic GMP,
generated by nitric oxide through guanylate cyclase, and cyclic AMP,
generated by beta-2 agonists and prostacyclin,
both act through their protein kinases to lower calcium — by enhancing its uptake
and extrusion and reducing its entry and release — and to enhance phosphatase
activity, desensitising the apparatus.
Hyperpolarisation through potassium channels closes voltage-gated calcium channels,
reducing entry.
So smooth muscle relaxes when calcium is pumped out by membrane and
sarcoplasmic-reticulum ATPases and the sodium–calcium exchanger and the myosin is
dephosphorylated, a process actively driven by the cyclic-GMP and cyclic-AMP
pathways and by potassium-channel-mediated hyperpolarisation — the very mechanisms
our relaxant drugs exploit.
What sets the resting membrane potential of smooth muscle,
and how do potassium channels feature?
The resting membrane potential of smooth muscle is less negative and less stable
than that of skeletal muscle, typically around minus fifty to minus sixty
millivolts, and it is set chiefly by the membrane's permeability to potassium,
with potassium channels acting as the key regulators of excitability and tone.
As in all cells, the potential arises from ionic gradients maintained by the
sodium–potassium ATPase and the selective permeability of the membrane,
with potassium efflux through open potassium channels being the dominant influence
pulling the potential towards the potassium equilibrium.
Several types of potassium channel are present and important:
ATP-sensitive potassium channels, which open when cellular energy falls and link
metabolism to vasodilatation; calcium-activated potassium channels,
which provide negative feedback, opening when calcium rises to hyperpolarise and
limit contraction; and voltage-gated channels.
Because opening potassium channels hyperpolarises the membrane and so closes the
voltage-gated calcium channels, reducing calcium entry and causing relaxation,
these channels are powerful regulators of vascular and other smooth muscle tone.
This is the basis of the potassium-channel-opening vasodilators and contributes to
the metabolic vasodilatation that matches blood flow to demand,
since local hypoxia and falling ATP open ATP-sensitive channels.
So the resting potential of smooth muscle is set largely by potassium permeability
and is relatively depolarised and unstable,
and the various potassium channels — ATP-sensitive,
calcium-activated and voltage-gated — are central regulators of excitability and
tone, opening to hyperpolarise and relax the muscle,
a mechanism exploited pharmacologically and used in physiological flow regulation.
How does smooth muscle remodel in chronic disease?
Smooth muscle shows long-term structural plasticity, undergoing hypertrophy,
hyperplasia and phenotypic change in response to sustained altered load or
stimulation, and this remodelling underlies several chronic diseases relevant to
anaesthesia.
In the systemic vasculature, sustained hypertension causes vascular smooth muscle
to hypertrophy and the vessel wall to thicken and stiffen,
increasing resistance and contributing to the perpetuation of hypertension and to
end-organ damage.
In the pulmonary circulation, chronic hypoxia or raised pressure drives pulmonary
vascular smooth muscle proliferation and muscularisation of small vessels,
producing the fixed component of pulmonary hypertension.
In the airways, chronic asthma causes airway smooth muscle hypertrophy and
hyperplasia as part of airway remodelling,
increasing the bronchoconstrictor capacity and the fixed obstruction of
long-standing disease.
In the heart's coronary and systemic vessels,
atherosclerosis involves smooth muscle cells migrating and changing phenotype from
a contractile to a synthetic, proliferative state, contributing to plaque formation.
The bladder muscle hypertrophies above a chronic outflow obstruction,
and the pregnant uterus undergoes massive physiological hypertrophy and
hyperplasia. This remodelling is often only partly reversible and changes the
response to drugs.
So smooth muscle remodels through hypertrophy,
hyperplasia and phenotypic switching in chronic hypertension,
pulmonary hypertension, asthma, atherosclerosis and outflow obstruction,
contributing the fixed, structural component of these diseases and altering their
pharmacological responsiveness.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Smooth muscle contracts by a calcium-calmodulin-myosin light chain kinase
mechanism acting on the thick filament - it has no troponin - and relaxes via
myosin light chain phosphatase; the cascade is slow and gradable.
Second, It depends heavily on extracellular calcium entry (voltage-,
receptor- and store-operated channels) plus sarcoplasmic-reticulum release via IP3,
which is why it is exquisitely sensitive to calcium-channel blockers.
Third, The latch state allows sustained tension at minimal energy cost through
slowly-cycling cross-bridges, underlying tonic vascular tone and sphincter closure;
calcium sensitisation via RhoA/Rho-kinase tunes force for a given calcium.
Fourth, Vascular tone integrates sympathetic drive, hormones, local metabolites,
the myogenic response and endothelial nitric oxide;
relaxation is achieved by raising cyclic GMP or AMP, blocking calcium entry,
opening potassium channels or removing constrictor tone.
Fifth, Almost all our vasopressors, vasodilators, bronchodilators,
uterotonics and tocolytics are smooth-muscle drugs acting on a common contractile
logic; neuromuscular blockers, by contrast,
act only on skeletal muscle's nicotinic junction and not on smooth muscle.
Thank you. That concludes the station.